the Secretary of State calls the
president a moron the chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee then
says that the Secretary of State is one
of the three people who quote separate
our country from chaos
this week's chaos in the Trump
administration is by now unsurprising
and was in effect predicted by the new
book the dangerous case of Donald Trump
27 psychiatrists and mental-health
experts assess a president edited by
Mandy Lee MD a psychiatrist the book
includes and validates some of the
general news media's speculation about
Donald Trump's mental capacity there is
this passage in the book from a David
Brooks column in The New York Times he
cannot be contained because he is
psychologically off the chain with each
passing week he displays the classic
symptoms of medium-grade mania in more
disturbing forms inflated self-esteem
sleeplessness impulsivity aggression and
a compulsion to offer advice on subjects
he knows nothing about his speech
patterns are like something straight out
of a psychiatric textbook Mannix display
something called
flight of ideas it's a formal thought
disorder in which ideas tumble forth
through a disordered chain of
associations one word sparks another
which sparks another and they're off to
the races as one trained psychiatrist
said to me compare Donald Trump speaking
patterns to a Robin Williams monologue
but with insults instead of jokes and
David Brooks wrote that column over a
year ago when Donald Trump was the
Republican nominee for president
the reported reason that the Secretary
of State called the president a moron
was because the president compared the
Afghanistan war policy to the
renovations of the 21 club restaurant in
midtown Manhattan president Trump told
his national security advisors a story
of the 21 club hiring very expensive
consultants for a renovation that took
well over a year and ended up changing
virtually nothing in the restaurant and
Trump's point was that talking to the
waiters at
restaurant would have led to a better
more efficient set of choices than
listening to the so-called experts and
so why should he listen to the experts
on Afghanistan and when that story
became public the 21 club said not one
word of it was true the owner of the 21
club at the time said I have no idea
what was in his head I never have the
editor of the dangerous case of Donald
Trump and the author of Donald Trump's
first book the art of the deal will join
us next written by a nice reporter now
the poor guy you got to see this guy I
don't know what I said I don't remember
he's gonna like how to remember I the OL
baby that's what I said we're joined now
by dr. bandy Lee a forensic psychiatrist
on the faculty of the Yale School of
Medicine and the editor of the new book
the dangerous case of Donald Trump 27
psychiatrists and mental-health experts
assess a president also joining us Tony
Schwartz co-author of Donald Trump's
best-selling book the art of the deal he
was actually the real author of the book
his co-author Donald Trump didn't read a
word of it and Tony Schwartz also has an
entry in this new book edited by dr. Lee
dr. Lee what what brought the group
together to to produce this book because
I know a year ago it was very difficult
for me to find a psychiatrist who was
willing to come on television and talk
about Donald Trump because the general
rule was it's a patient I haven't
diagnosed so how can I talk about well
that was my seeing experience when
trying to write to various Congress
members and initially I had a letter of
concern and then I had organized a
conference to speak about the ethics of
the duty to warn versus the duty to
refrain from commenting on public
figures and so basically it's a judgment
among the professionals that in this
case the duty to warn outweighs that can
see the consideration that would
normally apply which is I'm not going
for a public diagnosis of the person I
have not met yes and initially it was
very hard to get any Co signatories to
the letter letters I was writing or to
get any coordinates for the conference
but after the conference
hundreds of mental health professionals
got in touch with me expressing their
same concern the assessment was almost
unanimous that they were all concerned
and did not know of a way to speak about
it and now we have about 4,000 members
to the coalition that we had named duty
to warn we have 63,000 signatories to a
petition that John Gartner had created
and when I was compiling this book we
couldn't include everybody because there
were so many people coming forth and as
you can see this is the just a
representative sample of the most
eminent members of our Lance notice in
here who is a former Harvard Medical
School faculty who was one of the first
psychiatrists to join us here last year
and talk about it Tony I have a question
for you that is about policy and the
psyche of Donald Trump and and it's the
crucial kind of the crucial question of
the day or the week for next week and
that is the Iran deal we have a report
coming out tonight saying that the
president is going to now announce next
week that he is going to pull the United
States out of the Iran deal
knowing Donald Trump as you do and I and
my judgment you know I'm better than
anyone who speaks about him publicly
would he pull the United States out of
the Iran deal just because Rex Tillerson
is in favor of staying with the Iran
deal is that the kind of psyche we're
dealing with well I don't know that that
would be the only reason but it
certainly could put him over the edge
he's getting obviously very conflicting
advice about whether to do that and
there's still factions in his
administration arguing each side
yes he is emotionally driven not
obviously intellectually driven you
don't even want to use that word with
regard to Trump and I absolutely believe
that any decision he makes is going to
be primarily influenced by the intensity
of the emotion he happens to be feeling
at that moment which includes personal
feeling about the person he's dealing
with whether he likes that person or not
you know it isn't about liking the
person because Donald Trump doesn't like
people what he does is he sees them as
useful or not useful and he sees them as
it's mirroring him and supporting him or
opposing him and diminishing him and
there's certainly no question that right
now he sees Tillerson as someone who is
an injury to his sense of himself I want
to go to just one entry in the book this
is a Henry Friedman associate professor
of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School
on the role of Donald Trump's cabinet
relevant to this week's Tillerson story
he says a paranoid hypersensitive
grandiose ill-informed leaders such as
Donald Trump who has surrounded himself
with a cabinet and set of advisers who
either are unable to bring him out of
his paranoid suspicions and insistence
ease or worse identify with his
positions represents a multi-dimensional
threat to our country and the world and
and dr. Lee when a psychiatrist sees
this that way that's the definition of
the duty to one exactly the Goldwater
rule itself which is the ethical
guideline not to diagnose a public
figure in the open falls under the
ethical principle that we participate in
activities that promote public health
and public mental health and so when it
when silence contributes to harm to the
public health then we do have a duty to
speak out and the duty to warn and the
duty to protect is pervasive in our
practice and prior to this situation the
duty to warn generally applied
individual cases you you have a patient
who you believe might commit a violent
crime or something like that Tony take
us inside Donald Trump as you know that
man when he gets the news yesterday
morning at 6:00 a.m. that NBC News is
reporting that Rex Tillerson has called
him a moron I mean it's almost
unimaginable how enraged he must have
been under those circumstances and
that's what our reporting is now that he
was enraged because the idea that such a
authoritative figure in his own
administration by a guy who claims to
prize loyalty he has none of it evident
toward other people but he expects it
from other people the kind of
combination of circumstances what had to
have put him at a very then this is when
he moves into the kind of emotion where
he could vastly overreact it's the very
thing that as far back as July 16 I was
saying made me think that he could in an
impulsive angry moment you know punch in
the nuclear codes with nobody between
him and our destruction doctor bandy Lee
and Tony Schwartz thank you very much
for joining us the book is the dangerous
case of Donald Trump and this is an
historic work in the history of American
psychiatry we have never been in this
place before thank you both very much
for joining us I really appreciate hey
there I'm Chris Hayes from MSNBC thanks
for watching MSNBC on YouTube if you
want to keep up to date with the videos
we're putting out you can click
subscribe just below me or click over on
this list to see lots of other great
videos